# forEach: The Unexpressive Collection-Processing Method

## Learning Goals

- Use `forEach` to Work with an Array
- Explain why `forEach` is the least-expressive collection-processing method

## Introduction

In the previous lesson, you learned that many of the collection-processing
functions are really slight variations on `map` and `reduce`.

But `map` and `reduce` are "child" collection-processing methods from the root
collection-processing method of them all, `.forEach`. In this lesson, we'll talk
about `forEach` and why it's a good idea to avoid it. Let's use it real quick.

## Use `forEach` to Work with an Array

By now, you're so comfortable with collection-processing methods, you'll find
`.forEach` follows the pattern of the "Character of Collection-Processing
Methods."

```js
oppressedWorkers = [
  "Dopey",
  "Sneezy",
  "Happy",
  "Angry",
  "Doc",
  "Lemonjello",
  "Sleepy"
];

oppressedWorkers.forEach(function(oppressedWorker) {
  console.log(`${oppressedWorker} wants to form a union!`);
}); //=> undefined

/* Output
Dopey wants to form a union!
Sneezy wants to form a union!
Happy wants to form a union!
Angry wants to form a union!
Doc wants to form a union!
Lemonjello wants to form a union!
Sleepy wants to form a union!
*/
```

We've saved talking about `forEach` for last. Despite the fact that `forEach`
most simply expresses the "Character of collection-processing Methods," we're
showing it _last_ because we to use it _least_. Why is that?

## Explain Why `forEach` is the Least-Expressive Collection-Processing Method

We want to avoid `forEach` because it is the least-expressive
collection-processing method. It communicates the _least_ to other programmers
about what we're trying to do.

By now you recognize that `map` means: "create a new `Array` after transforming
each element." You recognize that `reduce` means: "distill a value after
joining elements together." These methods are _expressive_, their very
definition tells other programmers what you intended to happen.

But what does `forEach` mean? Programmers, including you, recognize that `map` has
a specific use, `reduce` has a specific use, `max` has a specific use. But
`forEach` is generic. Are we just printing things, or are we trying to distill to
a value, or are we trying to produce a transformed `Array`?

When we use `forEach` to do `map`-things or `reduce`-things we're not
_documenting_ what our intention was with regard to the collection. This makes
for code that's harder to understand and debug. Here's some code that uses
`forEach` instead of `reduce`.

```js
function sumArray(numberArray) {
  let total = 0;
  numberArray.forEach(function(i) {
    total = total + i;
  });
  return total;
}
sumArray([1, 2, 3]); //=> 6
```

Sure, it works, but it doesn't _communicate_. We should always strive to have
code that communicates _first_ and works _second_.

## Identify Cases for `forEach`

The best time to use `forEach` is when you need to enumerate a collection to
(1) cause some sort of "side-effect" or (2) are changing the elements
("mutating") as you go along.

The best example of "doing a side-effect" is using `console.log()`. This
function doesn't return anything back. We don't care about the data that
returns from this action. We're using `forEach` here strictly to do something
that, as _side-effect_ is something that's handy for us i.e. printing content
to the screen.

This is pretty common in debugging:

```js
  empCollection.forEach(function(e){
    console.log("DEBUG: WHAT ARE YOU?!?" + e)
  })
```

The other time we want to use `forEach` is when the element will be changed
by the process of `forEach`-ing. Since the name `forEach` is **so**
unexpressive, as casual readers of this code, anything that happens in here
is going to be a surprise, a _side-effect_.

As an example, consider:

```js
function addFullNameToEmployees(empCollection){
  empCollection.forEach(function(e){
    e.fullName = `${e.firstName} ${e.familyName}`
  })
}

addFullNameToEmployees([
  {firstName: "Byron", familyName: "Karbitii"},
  {firstName: "Luca", familyName: "Tuexedensis"}
])
```

There's nothing generated by the `forEach` that we want to preserve (if that
were so, we'd want to use `map`). The employee, `e`, is updated as a
_side-effect_ of running `forEach`. The only clue that helps us guess what
`forEach` is for here is that the programmer "wrapped" it inside of a
helpfully-named function name.


## Conclusion

This concludes our discussion of `forEach`. It's the most flexible
collection-processing method, but it's also the least expressive. When you
aren't sure which way to go, you might want to use it, but most of the time you
really want to use `map` or `reduce`.
